[DOC] Procedure for upgrading AMQ Streams on RHEL (#40)
rh-messaging/amq-streams-docs: books/assembly-upgrade-1-1-0.adoc

// Module included in the following assemblies:
//
// master.adoc

[id='assembly-upgrade-1-1-0-{context}']

= Upgrading an {ProductName} cluster from 1.0.0 to 1.1.0

This chapter describes how to upgrade {ProductName} on Red Hat Enterprise Linux to version 1.1.0, which is based on Apache Kafka 2.1.1. No cluster downtime is required. 

> Although AMQ Streams 1.1.0 and Kafka 2.1.1 are both minor releases, the Kafka protocol has changed since Kafka 2.0.0 was released (in particular, the message format version and inter-broker protocol version are both now at version 2.1). Therefore, the upgrade process involves configuration changes to your existing Kafka brokers and code changes to client applications (consumers and producers).

Reviewer: Should we mention Zookeeper? Zookeeper version haven't changed, but they should probably still get the new binaries.

Upgrading to {ProductName} 1.1.0 is a two-stage process:

> . First, you upgrade your {ProductName} installation to version 1.1.0, and then conduct performance testing.

Reviewer: I think we need to clarify which parts need to be done on all machines and which parts should be done machine by machine. 

For example here if the user goes and upgrades the installation on all servers and only then goes and changes the config for the protocol versions, every restart will automatically load the new version.

So afaik the best approach is either to join some of these steps or change the order (i.e. first set the message version and interbroker protocol to 2.0 on all brokers and afterwards install the software on all brokers etc.)

> . First, you upgrade your {ProductName} installation to version 1.1.0, and then conduct performance testing.

Reviewer: I'm not sure I understand what do they need to _performance test_. I think we should leave it out or if it is something we really need, we should explain how to do it.

. Next, you upgrade all Kafka brokers and clients to Kafka 2.1.1. To avoid cluster downtime, this stage involves multiple procedures.

The remainder of this chapter is divided into six separate procedures; Red Hat recommends that you complete them in the order shown.

. xref:proc-upgrading-to-amq-streams-1-1-0-{context}[Upgrading to {ProductName} 1.1.0]
. xref:proc-downgrading-kafka-brokers-to-previous-protocol-versions-{context}[Downgrading Kafka brokers to the previous protocol versions]
. xref:proc-updating-kafka-brokers-to-new-inter-broker-protocol-version-{context}[Updating Kafka brokers to the new inter-broker protocol version]
. xref:proc-upgrading-clients-to-new-kafka-version-{context}[Upgrading client applications to the new Kafka version]
. xref:proc-updating-kafka-brokers-to-new-message-format-version-{context}[Updating Kafka brokers to the new message format version]

> .Prerequisites

Reviewer 2: Is "you" necessary in these statements? Perhaps simplify to " First, update your Zookeeper cluster..." for example.

> .Prerequisites

Reviewer 3: Simplified and removed the 'you'

|1.0                   |2.0.0         
|1.1.0                 |2.1.1         
|=======================

Although {ProductName} 1.1.0 and Kafka 2.1.1 are both minor releases, the Kafka protocol has changed since Kafka 2.0.0 was released. In particular, the message format version and inter-broker protocol version are both now at version 2.1. As a result, the upgrade process involves making both configuration changes to existing Kafka brokers and code changes to client applications (consumers and producers). The following table shows the differences between the two Kafka versions:

[options="header"]
|=======================
|Kafka version |Inter-broker protocol version |Log message format version |Zookeeper version
|2.0.0         |2.0                           |2.0                        |3.4.13
|2.1.1         |2.1                           |2.1                        |3.4.13
|=======================

Although Kafka 2.0.0 and 2.1.1 use the same version of Zookeeper, Red Hat recommends that you update your Zookeeper cluster to use the newest Zookeeper binaries before proceeding with the main {ProductName} 1.1.0 upgrade.

Message format version::

> In Kafka, there are two different methods for setting the message format version. 

Reviewer 4: I think you need a sentence just to explain what this is.

"""
When a Kafka producer sends a message to a broker that message is encoded using a specific format. The broker can be configured to convert messages from newer format verions to a given older format version before the message is appended to the log.
"""

Author: Resolved

* The `log.message.format.version` property is set on Kafka brokers.

* The `message.format.version` property is set on topics. 

The default value of `message.format.version` for a  topic is defined by the `log.message.format.version` that is set on the Kafka broker. You can manually set the `message.format.version` of a topic by modifying its topic configuration. This chapter refers to the _message format version_ throughout when discussing both Kafka brokers and topics.

Procedure outline::

In summary, upgrading to {ProductName} 1.1.0 is a four-stage process:

. First, you update your Zookeeper cluster to use the newest Zookeeper binaries.

.. xref:proc-updating-zookeeper-binaries-{context}[Updating the Zookeeper binaries]

> . Second, you update all Kafka brokers to use the previous protocol versions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
. Second, you configure all Kafka brokers to use the previous protocol versions.
```

.. xref:proc-updating-kafka-brokers-to-previous-protocol-versions-{context}[Updating Kafka brokers to the previous protocol versions]

. Third, you upgrade all Kafka brokers to {ProductName} 1.1.0. 
.. xref:proc-upgrading-kafka-brokers-to-amq-streams-1-1-0-{context}[Upgrading Kafka brokers to {ProductName} 1.1.0]

. Finally, you upgrade all Kafka brokers and client applications to Kafka 2.1.1. To avoid cluster downtime, this stage involves three related procedures:

.. xref:proc-updating-kafka-brokers-to-new-inter-broker-protocol-version-{context}[Updating Kafka brokers to the new inter-broker protocol version] 

.. Decide on an appropriate strategy for upgrading your client applications based on xref:con-strategies-for-upgrading-clients-{context}[Strategies for upgrading clients].

.. xref:proc-upgrading-clients-to-new-kafka-version-{context}[Upgrading client applications to the new Kafka version] (describes one upgrade strategy in more detail).

.. xref:proc-updating-kafka-brokers-to-new-message-format-version-{context}[Updating Kafka brokers to the new message format version]

> Red Hat recommends that you complete the upgrade procedures in the order shown.

Reviewer 4: Really this is more than a recommendation. If they were to do things in a different order things would likely break. So we should put it more forcefully.

```suggestion
In order to upgrade brokers and clients without downtime you need to complete the upgrade procedures in the order given above.
```
